AutoTutor meets Large Language Models:
A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury
sankalan.palchowdhury@inf.ethz.ch
Vilém Zouhar
vilem.zouhar@inf.ethz.ch
Mrinmaya Sachan
mrinmaya.sachan@inf.ethz.ch
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
MWPTutor
I see your solution. You seem to have made some
errors. How about we start fresh and do it step by step?
Okay, I’m not sure where to start though.
What should be the first step?
I think Cody’s starting amount of tickets, which is 49,
should be the first step.
Tell me this instead: How many tickets does Cody
have left after spending 25 on a beanie from his original 49
tickets?
Oh, he would have 24 tickets left.
24 is correct, well done. What is the next step?
Next, he won 6 more tickets, so I think we add that to
the 24 he already has.
Okay, can you do that calculation?
Yes, 24 + 6 is 30, so Cody would have 30 tickets in total.
30 is the correct answer to the problem. Well done!!!
Don’t hesitate to contack me again if you have any troubles.
GPT4 Tutor
Hi! Could you walk me through your solution?
I’m not sure where to start. I know Cody won 49 tickets and spent 25 on a beanie, but I don’t know how to
figure out how many he has left.
That’s a great starting point. So, if Cody had 49 tickets and he spends some on a beanie, what kind of
math operation would you use to find out how many tickets he would have left?
Subtraction, I think.
Exactly, subtraction is the right operation. Can you try subtracting the number of tickets Cody spent on
the beanie from the number of tickets he initially won? What do you get?
— 12 more tutor utterances —
28 tickets.
That’s correct. Now, if we subtract another ticket from the 28, what number do we get?
27 tickets.
Yes, that’s right. And another ticket taken from 27? What does that leave us with?
26 tickets.
Exactly. And if we take one more away from 26, where does that get us?
25 tickets.
— 13 more tutor utterances —
Figure 1: A pair of real tutoring conversations with GPT4 and MWPTutor. GPT4 does not have any higher level control, so it
begins to cycle in its tutoring. As a result, while MWPTutor took 6 tutor utterances to guide the student to the correct answer,
GPT4 took 29 tutor utterances and the student did not arrive at the correct solution.
ABSTRACT
Large Language Models (LLMs) have found several use cases in
education, ranging from automatic question generation to essay
evaluation. In this paper, we explore the potential of using LLMs
to author Intelligent Tutoring Systems. A common pitfall of using
LLMs as tutors is their straying from desired pedagogical strategies
such as leaking the answer to the student, and in general, provid-
ing no guarantees on the validity or appropriateness of the tutor
assistance. We argue that while LLMs with certain guardrails can
take the place of subject experts, the overall pedagogical design still
needs to be handcrafted for the best learning results. Based on this
principle, we create a sample end-to-end tutoring system named
MWPTutor, which uses LLMs to fill in the state space of a pre-
defined finite state transducer. This approach retains the structure
and the pedagogy of traditional tutoring systems that has been de-
veloped over the years by learning scientists but brings in additional
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
flexibility of LLM-based approaches. Through a human evaluation
study on two datasets with math word problems, we show that our
hybrid approach achieves a better overall tutoring score than an in-
structed, but otherwise free-form, GPT-4. MWPTutor is completely
modular and opens up the scope for the community to improve its
performance by refining its individual modules or using different
teaching strategies that it can follow.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing→ Collaborative and social
computing systems and tools ; Empirical studies in collabora-
tive and social computing; • Applied computing→ Computer-
assisted instruction; Computer-managed instruction.
KEYWORDS
Tutoring, math word problems, Large Language Models, AutoTutor,
Finite State Transducers
ACM Reference Format:
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024. AutoTutor
meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy
and Guardrails. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
arXiv:2402.09216v3  [cs.CL]  25 Apr 2024
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
1 INTRODUCTION
Computer-based automated tutoring has long been seen as the
method to scale up the benefits of expert human tutoring to millions
of students, a problem originally posed by Bloom [3]. Of various
attempts to do so, the AutoTutor family [20] is perhaps one of the
more notable ones. This family of tutors simulates natural language
conversations with students based on pre-defined scripts, aiming
to emulate one-on-one tutoring. While the AutoTutor family has
shown substantial learning gains [20], it is difficult to expand it to
different topics. Each expansion requires a lot of expert labor to
incorporate the required domain knowledge for every concept in
the curriculum and appropriate teaching strategies [15].
Recent developments in Large Language Models (LLMs), such as
GPT [22], or FlanT5 [8], have opened up a new venue for computer-
based tutoring where the LLMs play the role of the teacher. While
previous work has shown the success of LLMs for tutoring [2, 27]
the non-modular black-box nature of these models makes it impos-
sible to make incremental improvements or control the pedagogy
it pursues in assisting the student. The uninterpretable and uncon-
trollable nature of LLMs makes it difficult for experts or teachers
to make changes in their strategy. It is also difficult to develop
trust towards such models, not least because they might be open to
jailbreak attacks [17] as well as privacy concerns. Finally, the propri-
etary nature of highly performant LLMs means that the tutor needs
a persistent internet connection and an OpenAI account to function,
and we are highly dependent on OpenAI policies. This could be
bypassed by fine-tuning a local open LLM, but doing so leads to
either prohibitively high resource requirements, or significantly
worse performance (see FlanT5 vs ChatGPT in [18]).
The design process of AutoTutor and other similar intelligent
tutoring systems can be split into two distinct stages, carried out
by different, yet potentially overlapping, sets of stakeholders. The
first stage is the general framework level design , carried out mostly
by learning scientists (possibly along with computer scientists).
This includes designing the pedagogy, the mechanisms required to
interact with the student, and potentially even authoring tools. This
is typically done only once for an entire domain. The second stage,
performed by either teachers or domain experts, is to author the
scripts1, which needs to be done separately for every topic, question,
or concept. In the standard framework, both these stages are done
by humans. In contrast, in the LLM-only framework discussed in
the previous paragraph, both these stages are carried out (implicitly
or explicitly) by LLMs.
In this paper, we develop a mixed approach where we only dele-
gate the job of domain experts to an LLM, while the first stage is
still left to learning experts. This idea has previously been hinted at
by Cai et al. [6], who propose using a question-answering system
to automatically list potential misconceptions for a given topic. We
extend this idea to have an LLM author the entire script for the
tutoring system. This authoring process includes internal checks
and guardrails, making the results accurate enough to be deployed
without human validation. However, should validation be essen-
tial, we also describe a version that can be checked by humans to
increase trust.
0Code and data publicly available: github.com/eth-lre/MWPTutor
1See Appendix A in [12] for an example script.
In our experiments, we find that our system is better at tutoring
an AI-simulated student than instructed, but otherwise free-form
GPT4. We also find that human evaluators judge that individual
utterances are indeed following the specified pedagogy. However,
manual analysis of the conversations shows that there is still some
scope for improvement. In summary, our contributions in this paper
are as follows:
• We adapt the Dialog Based tutoring framework used by ITS’s to
make it possible for an LLM to author it.
• We design MWPTutor, a tutor for math word problems which
can function both with or without live calls to an LLM based on
the above principles.
• We compare the performance of both versions of MWPTutor
with that of GPT4 being used as a tutor both quantitatively and
qualitatively.
2 BACKGROUND
Tutoring is an integral part of teaching where the teacher attempts
to identify confusions or misconceptions a student might have,
and rectify them. This is done in a way to minimize their future
re-occurrence. Bloom et al. [3] showed that tutoring is extremely
important for education, as a student receiving one-on-one tutoring
can perform much better than a student only getting lectures. As
opposed to lecturing, tutoring is more personalized, and therefore
only feasible in smaller groups. This lower teacher-to-student ra-
tio needs to be balanced by a higher number of tutors, which is
expensive and not always feasible.
2.1 Rule-Based Systems
To combat the above scarcity, Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs)
were already being developed since the early 1980s [31]. The idea
was to roleplay a human tutor with a computer program that could
interact with the student and fulfill the requirement of personalized
tutoring. This may not fully replace human tutors but often pro-
vides an affordable and scalable addition. An important aspect that
differentiates ITSs from simply showing the students the problem
solution is their ability to provide step-by-step feedback which
promotes long-term learning as opposed to short-term problem-
solving success. This was often implemented using rules that check
for certain errors using string-matching and act on them with pre-
defined templates. For example, LISP Tutor [ 1] uses 475 rules to
account for common programming errors made by students.
With advancements in AI, ITSs transitioned to dialog as a method
of tutoring, moving ITSs from being information-delivery systems
to dialog-based agents. One of the key players in this field was the
first version of AutoTutor [14], which replaced the rules in tradi-
tional ITSs with a full finite state transducer which they called the
Dialog Advancement Network. This allows the students to interact in
natural language and the tutor processes their inputs using methods
like latent semantic analysis and attempts to respond using a set of
predefined rules. Over the next two decades, various tutors such
as the AutoTutor explored different domains, tutoring strategies,
affective statements, etc. to become one of the most comprehensive
ITSs (see [20] for the summary of developments).
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
With concepts and tutoring strategies getting more complex,
writing the rules governing the finite state transducers quickly be-
comes time-consuming. Not knowing the student misconceptions
in advance, domain experts have to come up with rules for numer-
ous possibilities, introducing a different set of scaling issues. One
hour of interaction with a student costs over 100 hours of domain
expert time to author the ITS [15]. This is in addition to the time
spent by learning scientists designing the pedagogy and dialog
strategies. However, this is usually done only once for the topics
in a subject area. As a result, this limits the AutoTutor to a small
set of subject areas, restricting their impact. Nevertheless, there are
many works in the space of rule-based ITS [23], which have been
reasonably successful in their domains.
2.2 Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs) are Transformer-based models that
serve as general-purpose tools in natural language processing [4].
With recent improvements in LLMs and the availability of LLM-as-a-
service models like GPT [22] and BARD [34], it has become easy to
use LLMs as tutors by prompting them with the desired qualities of
a tutor and then letting them interact with a student. Some works in
the programming domain like GPTutor [7] and Phung et al. [25, 26]
attempt to use GPT4 similar to information delivery systems. There
have also been systems designed to function as Dialog agents, like
Ruffle&Riley [30] which includes multiple GPT4 agents functioning
with different prompts, and SPOCK [33] which attempts to distill
out tutoring knowledge from GPT4 into a smaller LLM. A notable
commercial usage of a LLM Tutor is seen in Khanmingo,2 which
uses the GPT4 backend for an interactive tutor.
While LLM tutors solve the scaling issues, it introduces a whole
new set of complications, primarily related to its probabilistic out-
put and proprietary models. The behavior of GPT4 can only be
controlled by making changes to its initial prompt or by inserting
prompts in between, making it hard to introduce the nuanced ped-
agogical strategies developed by learning scientists over the last
two decades. Even for simpler strategies, its probabilistic nature
leaves it open to being exploited by users who behave in unwanted
ways, often referred to as jailbreak attacks [17]. Even for benign
users, GPT4 can often hallucinate incorrect information and output
it with confidence [10, 36] which may adversely affect the student.
All this, in addition to their hard-to-understand nature, leads to a
distrust of GPT4 among educators and policymakers, causing it to
be banned in several US public schools.3
2.3 Our work
The main benefit of the fully human-authored setting comes from
the fact that it is easy to control, easy to interpret, and therefore
easy to trust. Most of these benefits come from the pedagogy design
stage, and not from the work of the domain experts. The LLM-based
approaches, on the other hand, mostly speed up the domain ex-
perts’ tasks. To bring together the best of both worlds, we propose
an expert-designed pedagogy to be assisted by an LLM in the dia-
logue part. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 3
introduces our general design which applies to several domains,
2khanacademy.org/khan-labs
3bestcolleges.com/news/schools-colleges-banned-chat-gpt-similar-ai-tools
Section 4 describes the specific design of MWPTutor, Section 5
quantitatively evaluates MWPTutor, and Section 6 looks qualita-
tively at weaknesses of both GPT4 and MWPTutor.
3 DESIGN PRINCIPLES
While this work mainly focuses on Math Word Problems tutoring,
our broader goal is to present a paradigm that can be used across
different subjects. Before the math-specific aspects, we first describe
the model design principles. The output is the implementation
of a pedagogical goal as a template state space for a finite state
transducer similar to dialog advancement networks, which can then
be filled by an LLM. For the pedagogical strategy, a good doctrine
to follow can be Get the student to the correct answer. If possible, do
so without telling them the answer outright
A finite state transducer is characterized by the combination
of state space and a transition function. The state space can be
seen as the memory of the finite state transducer, which stores one
or more variables, each of which can take two or more values. In
our case, we have two variables, the solution step and the strategy,
which factorizes our state space into two subspaces, detailed in
Section 3.1 and Section 3.2 respectively. The transition function
specifies the next stage given the current state and the (student)
input and is highly domain-dependent, but we provide examples as
they come up alongside the state space descriptions
First, consider a math word problem and a history question to
illustrate the possible range of topics which a tutor might apply.
[MWP] Mikhael buys two old coats, one at $200 and one at $250. After
cleaning and fixing them, he sells them for a profit of 20% each. How much
money did Mikhael make from this transaction? 4
[WW1] List 4 causes of the First World War.
The optimal tutoring support differs between the two examples.
3.1 Solution Decomposition
To begin creating the state space for a finite state transducer, we
first need to list the solutions for the problem, creating thesolution
step space. As a first design principle, we want to have the solu-
tion broken down into multiple parts. For the math word problem
example, this could look like a tree:
Solution Step Space (MWP)
Branch A
A1 Calculate the total cost 200+ 250 = 450
A2 Calculate total profit 450× 20/100 = 90
Branch B
B1 Calculate the profit on the first coat 200× 20/100 = 40
B2 Calculate the profit on the second coat 250× 20/100 = 50
B3 Add to get total profit 40+ 50 = 90
To complete the question, the student needs to perform A1 fol-
lowed by A2. Alternatively, they can complete B1 and B2 in any
order and then B3. We transition out of a step if the student ar-
rives at the right-hand side of the equation in the (sub)question.
These dependency structures could look very different based on
the domain, like for the history question, for example:
4Mikhael spent $450, so a 20% profit would make him $90 from the transaction.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
Solution step space (WW1)
C1 Tensions by European colonial exploitation.
C2 Serbia wanted to create a pan-Balkan state causing tensions with
Austrohungarians and Ottomans.
C3 Austrohungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated by a
Serbian nationalist.
C4 The formation of the Triple Alliance and the responding Central Power
Alliance polarized Europe.
C5 German blank check assurance to Austria-Hungary provoked the Triple
Alliance.
C6 The German state was militarised.
In this case, a correct answer requires the student to complete any
4 out of C1-C6 in any particular order to be considered successful.
The transition function here is more complicated, but one way
would be to check if all underlined key terms have been mentioned.
Splitting a problem into smaller parts is beneficial for both human
learning [29, 32] and for LLM solvers [11, 21]. Getting an LLM to
split the problem into smaller parts allows us to thereafter focus
the LLM on smaller parts of the solution, which can also reduce
context lengths. In AutoTutor terminology, these solution steps
would correspond to “expectations”.
3.2 Pedagogical Strategy
Having broken down a problem into steps, we now need to have a
strategy to help the student achieve each step. The general idea is
to start vague, hoping for the student to do as much of the work
as possible, but then keep getting more specific until the student
can complete the step. For the math word problem example, a toy
strategy could be:
D1 Give out the solution step, ask for the calculation e.g.for A1, we would
say “Can you calculate the total cost incurred?”
D2 Read out the calculation to perform e.g. for A1, we would say “You have
to add 200 and 250”.
D3 Give out the answer, e.g. for A1, we would say “The answer is 450”.
This set of pedagogical strategies forms our strategy space. We
can transition from D1 to D2 and then to D3 if the conditions for
transitioning to the next solution step are not met, at which point
we loop in D3. For the history example, we have:
P1 Seek the next cause from the student e.g.irrespective of the step, we can
say “What other cause can you think of?”
P2 Ask for each missing keyword e.g.for C3 if we already have “assassina-
tion” from P1, we can ask “Who was Assasinated and by whom?”
P3 Reveal the answer if the student fails to get it.
The actual set of moves can be quite complex. For P2, we would
need separate utterances for every possible combination of missing
keywords. Ideally, these moves should be designed by learning
scientists as was the case for AutoTutor. The overall state space is
the cross-product of the solution state space and the strategy space.
Figure 2 shows what the full state space of our MWP example could
look like. For each element of the strategy space, we would require
prompt templates that can be filled with the solution step and passed
on to LLMs to generate the actual utterance. Running each prompt
for every step in the solution space maps every element in the state
space to an utterance. Not all utterances need to be unique, and
some, like P1 above, might not necessitate an LLM to be generated.
B1D1
B2D1
B3D1
B1D2
B2D2
B3D2
B1D3
B2D3
B3D3
determinestudent solutionpath
Start
Success
Solution path B
Student progresses to next step
Student needs more help in current step
Solution path A
(not shown)
Figure 2: Full state space for our MWP toy example. Vertical
blue rectangles show the strategy space and Horizontal green
rectangles show the solution step space. Solid arrows indi-
cate success in the current step, and dashed arrows indicate
failure. The states for branch A are collapsed for clarity.
3.3 Scaffolding the LLM
While modern LLMs fine-tuned to follow natural language instruc-
tions are quite good at doing so, they can at times struggle with
more complex tasks. Because of the probabilistic nature of LLMs,
reattempting the same problem can lead to different answers. To
take the best advantage of these facts, we want to have automated
checks for every LLM turn in the strategy space, so calls can be
repeated until some checks have been met. For example, D3 could
require that the numerical answer (450 for A1) is included in the
utterance, while P2 could require the missing keywords to be absent.
These checks can take different forms depending on the domain,
like limiting the length of an utterance or avoiding the use of more
complex language.
3.4 The Trade-off between Reliability and
Contextual Awareness
Once we have prompts for each utterance and relevant checks, we
can query an LLM to generate the tutor utterances. Here we have a
choice on when the generation is done. One option is to generate
all possible utterances at design time, and storing them into the
state space. This would be similar to what traditional ITSs would
do. Doing this not only allows the tutor to run without an active
internet connection, but having an exhaustive set of utterances
stored allows stakeholders to trust the tutor without necessarily
trusting the LLM used to generate the utterances. This is possible
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
because one can reliably say that there would be no “new” errors
or hallucinations since the LLM is not used after the design stage.
Despite these advantages, pre-generating means that all possible
scenarios that can arise during the conversation need to be antici-
pated in advance, which is extremely hard to achieve. Therefore,
such a model is likely to feel somewhat oblivious of the context of
the conversation, which might reduce student engagement, which
in turn, may reduce learning gains [5, 19, 24] The alternative to this,
is to generate the utterances during the conversation. This allows
us to include recent utterances from both the tutor and the student
into the prompt, thereby generating a more context-aware response.
Due to changing context, it is also possible to allow multiple utter-
ances for a single state, allowing for more fine-grained feedback.
Doing this, however, leaves the LLM open to hallucinations and
jailbreaks as discussed earlier.
The choice we make depends of factors like how good we believe
the backend LLMs are, how much the policymakers trust them, how
complex is the problem etc. We do not believe that any of these
options is better than the other, and the best option might be a
combination of both.
4 MWPTutor
We now detail the design process of our system MWPTutor, an
instantiation of the above principles. MWPTutor is adapted to help
students solve math word problems. The scenario, originally de-
fined by MathDial [18], involves a student approaching a tutor after
unsuccessfully attempting to solve a math word problem. The stu-
dent’s incorrect solution is provided as a part of the input. GSM8k
[9], the source for MathDial’s problems includes a single step-by-
step solution to each problem, which can be seen as a fulfillment
of the solution step space. However, to not become constrained
to the availability of such solutions, and to allow diverse solution
paths, we restrict MWPTutor to only the final numerical answer
to the problem, and generate the solutions ourselves. Further, to
highlight the tradeoff mentioned in section 3.4, we shall design two
slightly different versions MWPTutorlive, which is allowed to make
live calls to the LLM, and MWPTutorcached which is not. Note that
unless otherwise specified, designs mentioned in this section apply
to both versions.
4.1 Solution Decomposition
We instantiate the solution steps as short pieces of text describing
a step in the math word problem, including a single mathematical
calculation. We generate multiple solution paths with our backend
LLM, with each step needing to contain a single calculation demar-
cated in double angular braces (e.g.⟨⟨30+ 43 = 73⟩⟩, see Listing 1).
This requirement standardizes the information density of a step
and also keeps things consistent with GSM8K which uses a similar
notation. It also allows us to check for calculation errors and discard
erroneous paths. Once multiple solution paths have been obtained,
we discard the paths not leading to the final correct solution, and
group the rest together using exact string match on the calculations
into a “tree” of solution steps. Our running example, except for the
angular brackets, fits this criterion as a tree with two branches at
the root and no branches elsewhere.
Initiate
Pump
CorrectAnswerDetected
Hint
No
CorrectAnswerDetected
Prompt
No
CorrectAnswerDetected
Assertion
No
CorrectAnswerDetected
No
Last
Step?
Move to
Next Step
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Student solution
Solution tree
Math problem
Alignment/First ErrorDetection
Terminate
Figure 3: MWPTutor’s state space as a flowchart. The
symbol indicates student utterance inputs, while the
symbol indicates model output. The solution step space is
collapsed for clarity
4.2 Solution Alignment
Although not a part of design principles, we wish to not make
the students repeat a step they have already performed correctly.
To achieve this, we match steps in the original student solution
with the closest path in the solution step space. While AutoTutor
achieves this using latent semantic analysis and string-matching
techniques, we found that modern counterparts, such as BERTScore
[37] are surprisingly not an apt replacement, perhaps because GPT4
outputs very long step descriptions, and BERT does not weigh and
compare numbers and mathematical operations well.
MWPTutor currently assumes that the student will present their
solution with one step in each line. For each student step, we check if
the right-hand side of any of the possible follow-up steps is present
in it. If more than one follow-up matches, we pick the one with
the highest BERTScore. We then proceed down that node of the
solution tree and the next student step. If no follow-up matches,
the current step is considered to be the first point of error. The
pseudo-code for this is shown in Algorithm 1.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
Algorithm 1 Initial solution alignment.
Input: gold and student solutions.
Output: aligned solution step, if exists
1: GoldSteps← gold.root
2: StudStep← student.head
3: while GoldSteps is not LeafNode do
⊲ Filter out next solution steps whose RHS is in the current student step
4: Matches←{ 𝑐|𝑐∈GoldSteps.children∧ FindNums(StudStep.text)∈ 𝑐. rhs}
5: if Matches is empty then ⊲ Nothing matches, this is the first point of error
6: return(GoldSteps, StudStep)
7: else
⊲ Move to next step
8: GoldStep← Max(Matches, key=𝜆𝑥 : BertScore(𝑥, StudStep.text))
9: StudStep← StudStep.next
10: end if
11: end while
12: return Error(“Student has the right answer. ”)
4.3 Pedagogical Strategy
To instantiate our pedagogy, we take inspiration from AutoTutor,
where the primary sequence of steps is a pump→hint→prompt→
assertion (Section 2 of [13]). Graesser et al. in their work Teaching
Tactics in Autotutor [12] define hints as “questions that lead the
student to the desired information”, and assertions (which they
call elaborations in this work) as “succinctly assert the desired in-
formation. ” For prompts, they use fill-in-the-blanks type utterances
leaving out a keyword. In our case, the “keyword” is the equation,
so instead we explain the calculation to be performed in a natural
language. These are preceded by a “pump”, which is the generic
utterance “What should be the next step?” The overall strategy then
proceeds as follows:
Pump asks the student to propose the next step. If the student
proposes the step correctly, we ask them to solve it.
Hint is only triggered if the student fails to propose a valid
next step, or fails to execute the step they propose. It
essentially gives out the step and asks the student for
the calculation. This utterance should take the form of
a question, and the only way to correctly answer the
question should be to successfully execute the step.
Prompt is triggered if the student fails to execute the step after
the hint. This should push the student closer to the
answer, without actually revealing the answer.
Assertion is triggered if the student fails to answer even after
the prompt. This should simply give out the answer,
and have the student acknowledge it.
In our running example, hints, prompts, and assertions corre-
spond to D1, D2, and D3 respectively. The pump is not included.
For scaffolding the LLM, both hints and prompts are required
to avoid explicitly outputting the right-hand side of the equation
in the step, with the hint additionally having to avoid saying any
words that indicate arithmetic operators, currently “add, subtract,
sum, multiply, product, divide, quotient. ” The assertion, on the other
hand, must contain the right-hand side. For pumps, there is no use
of an LLM, so we do not need a check.
For MWPTutorlive, we allow up to 3 prompts before moving to
assertion. For both hints and prompts, the LLM is given the steps
the student has correctly solved so far and the last 4 utterances in
the dialogue (2 each for the student and the tutor) in addition to
the solution step and strategy (see Appendix A.3 for details)
4.4 Answer and Path Detection
To execute the pedagogical strategies described above, we need to
detect if the student has given a correct answer. Further, the hint
state should only trigger if the student fails to propose a correct
follow-up. For this, we need to have a way to match paths. We run
into the same matching problems described in Section 4.2, and in
case of MWPTutorcached, resort to similar basic techniques. The
correct answer detection algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2. For
states other than pump, it takes a single reference step and checks
if its RHS is present in the student utterance. For the pump state,
all possible followups of the last step are passed as reference steps.
If it can find the RHS of any of these in the student utterance, it
marks that as the next step and proceeds to the next step. If not, it
considers a path match to have occurred if every operand on the
left-hand side of some step is present. If multiple steps fulfill this,
or no step does, we pick the one with the best BertScore alignment
to the student utterance.
Since MWPTutorlive is allowed to make live calls to the LLM,
we make use of it for both correct answer detection, and picking
the best path to take when in the “pump” stage. For correct answer
detection, we use the RHS match as an additional criterion, while
for picking the best path, we rely entirely on the LLM’s judgement.
The fact that MWPTutorcached currently ignores all non-numeric
content in the student response is one of its major limitations, as it
can miss a large number of “correct” utterances from the student,
but we defer the resolution of this to future work.
Algorithm 2 Correct Answer Detection
Inputs: CurrentSteps from Solution step space, and Student Ut-
terance
Output: Degree of the match, Best matching step
1: UtteranceNums← FindNums(Utterance)
⊲ CurrentSteps is a singleton except for “pump. ”
2: for 𝑟∈ CurrentSteps do
⊲ Go to next solution step
3: if 𝑟 .rhs∈ UtteranceNums then return (“Correct”, 𝑟)
4: end for
5: PartialMatches←⟨ 𝑟|𝑟∈ CurrentSteps∧ 𝑟 .lhs⊆ UtteranceNums⟩
6: if PartialMatches is empty then
7: return(“No match”, Max(CurrentSteps, Sort=Bert(𝑥, Utterance)))
8: else ⊲ Only relevant for “pump”.
9: return(“Part match”, Max(PartialMatches, Sort=Bert(𝑥, Utterance)))
10: end if
4.5 Putting it All Together
Figure 3 summarises the overall state space of MWPTutor. It can be
seen as a simplified version of the state space of AutoTutor (see Fig-
ure 1 in [6]). The expectation matching is implicitly carried out by
the solution aligner and the pump state. To obtain to full finite state
transducer structure, one must roll out the states along the solution
space. Excluding the unlikely case where the student fails to repeat
the answer after the assertion state, the overall conversation should
not last more than 2+ 4× 𝑆 utterance pairs for MWPTutorcached,
and 2+ 6× 𝑆 for MWPTutorlive, where 𝑆 is the number of steps.
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
5 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we the performance of MWPTutor and GPT4 in
terms of how well they can follow our previously mentioned doc-
trine. We test both models in the interactive setting proposed by
Macina et al. [ 18] which allows us to safely compare imperfect
models without having a negative impact on human users.
5.1 Setup
5.1.1 Setting. The interactive tutoring setting was proposed in
MathDial as a faster, cheaper, and safer alternative to human ex-
periments, where instead of interacting with human students, a
Tutoring System interacts with another LLM role-playing a student.
In their data collection experiments, MathDial found that most
teachers believed that the student LLM behaved very much like an
actual student in most cases. We adopt their setting as is for our
experiment section.
Note that for an LLM, the interactive tutoring setting is some-
what related to the MWP solver setting often used as a metric to
measure the reasoning abilities of said LLM, but there are signifi-
cant differences. Unlike the MWP solver setting, the final answer is
already provided, so the LLM does not need to come up with it. The
difficulty arises from the fact that this LLM needs to get the student
LLM to get to this answer, and the student LLM is prompted to not
budge from its starting wrong answer without good reason. Despite
these differences, some skills like Math Reasoning Abilities transfer
between the two settings, so we can expect the final performances
in both settings to correlate with each other.
5.1.2 Models. At the time of testing, GPT45 was considered to be
one of the best-performing LLMs, so we use it both as a backend for
the two MWPTutor’s and as the baseline single prompt LLM. To best
align the single prompt GPT4 with the MWPTutor doctrine, we ask
it to roleplay a tutor, setting the primary objective of getting to the
correct answer as the goal of the conversation, and the secondary
objective of not revealing the answer as a personality trait. Further,
to test the potential of an open-source LLM as a backend, we have a
second version of MWPTutor with a MetaMath-13B [35]. MetaMath
is a version of Meta AI’s open source LLM LLaMa6 fine-tuned to
solve math word problems, and is, to the best of our knowledge,
the best open LLM for solving math word problems. However,
since MWPTutorlive would require the Backend to run throughout
the conversation, which is unsustainable for a locally-run model,
we only use this with MWPTutorcached. We shall refer to the live
model as MWPTutorlive
GPT4, the cached models as MWPTutorcached
GPT4
and MWPTutorcached
LLaMa based on the backend, and the single prompt
model simply as GPT4 hereafter.
5.1.3 Datasets. To implement MWPTutor, we require a dataset
with math word problems and their solutions, as well as incorrect
student solutions. We make use of the test sets of two datasets,
namely MathDial [18] and MultiArith. MultiArith consists of 180
simple Math Word Problems that are usually solvable in 1 to 3 steps.
GPT3 was already able to solve over 90% of these problems with
the right prompts [16], and in our tests, we found that GPT4 was
able to get a perfect score in the MWP solver setting. With this
5gpt-4-1106-preview queried in January 2024
6llama.meta.com
dataset, we want to test if we can achieve the same performance
in the interactive tutoring setting. This dataset does not provide
any wrong solutions needed to instantiate the student model, so
we make use of errors made by a MetaMath solver as the original
student solution where possible, and leave the remaining questions
as “No idea how to begin”.
MathDial consists of 45 problems from the pre-existing GSM8k
[9]. Problems in GSM8k are meant to be solvable by a bright middle
school student using only basic arithmetic operators (+,−,×,÷),
taking up to 8 steps to solve. Of these, MathDial picks problems
that have official solutions taking 5 steps or fewer, that GPT3.5
consistently failed to solve. This makes MathDial a significantly
harder dataset to teach, and results on this dataset are expected to
show the differences between the models more clearly.
5.1.4 Metrics. Keeping in line with our doctrine, our primary met-
ric of evaluation is the Success Rate (S), which is measured as the
fraction of conversations where the student says the correct answer
eventually. The secondary metric is Telling Rate (T) , which is
the fraction of conversations where the tutor did not reveal the
answer. The tutor is said to have revealed the answer when they
say the final answer before the student has said it, and the student
succeeds in getting to the answer thereafter. Both these metrics
were originally defined by Macina et al. [18], but they do not offer
a way of combining them into a single score. It is quite easy to
increase success at the cost of increased telling. Therefore we also
calculate the Adjusted Success (S-T) rate as the fraction where
the student succeeded without having been told the answer and
use the harmonic mean between this number and the success rate
as an overall Tutoring Score ( 2𝑆(𝑆−𝑇)
2𝑆−𝑇 ). We also offer utterance
level evaluations in Section 5.3, but since we are unaware of the
utterance level strategies from GPT4, we do it only for our model,
and the metrics for the same are defined later.
5.2 Conversation Evaluation
We evaluate both success and telling for the MultiArith dataset
by directly looking for the answer in student and tutor utterances
respectively, and calculate the overall scores based on that. The
top half of Table 1 summarises our results. All models are able to
transfer their near-perfect solving scores to near-perfect tutoring
scores. Both GPT4 and MWPTutorlive
GPT4 have no telling, while the
telling rate of the MWPTutorcached models is also almost negligble.
All 3 versions of MWPTutor have a perfect success rate, with GPT4
not far behind. These results demonstrate that all our models are
aligned with our doctrine, and are able to follow it well on a simpler
dataset. It must be noted that the metric is noisy since it only
requires the number to match, with no restriction on the context,
e.g. in the problem “How many groups of 9 can be made out of 5
boys and 40 girls?” if the tutor mentions there are5 boys, we would
count it as telling as the final answer happens to be 5. This means
that the real rates could be somewhat lower for all 3 models, and
the difference between them is not significant. Nevertheless, such
errors are unlikely to be frequent, and all models work reasonably
well on these problems.
For the harder MathDial dataset, we wanted to avoid matching
errors as described earlier, and so have human annotators mark
out utterances where the student or the tutor says the final answer.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
MWPTutorcached MWPT.live
GPT4LLaMa GPT4 GPT4
MultiArith
Success Rate 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.98
Telling Rate 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00
Adjusted Success 0.99 0.99 1.00 0.98
Tutoring Score 0.99 0.99 1.00 0.98
MathDial
Success Rate 0.91 0.96 1.00 0.82
Telling Rate 0.33 0.11 0.00 0.00
Adjusted Success 0.58 0.84 1.00 0.82
Tutoring Score 0.71 0.90 1.00 0.82
Table 1: Performance of MWPTutor and GPT4 on MultiArith
(180 problems) and MathDial (45 problems).
Each conversation was annotated by 3 annotators, and we took the
majority in cases where they disagreed.
The bottom half of Table 1 summarises our result. Both GPT4 and
MWPTutorlive
GPT4 maintain their 0% telling rate, but MWPTutorlive
GPT4
is the only model able to maintain its 100% success rate. This clearly
establishes MWPTutorlive
GPT4 as the model of choice should live access
to GPT4 not be an issue, as discussed in Section 3.4.
Of the cached models, MWPTutorcached
GPT4 gets 6 more problems
correct than GPT4, and 1 more when adjusted for telling. This gives
MWPTutorcached
GPT an advantage on GPT4 in terms of the final score.
MWPTutorcached
LLaMa also gets a higher success rate than GPT4, which
is somewhat surprising since its backend model is significantly
weaker than GPT4 in the MWP Solver setting [35]. This increased
success rate however comes at a cost of a very high telling rate,
giving it a significantly poorer tutoring score overall. Based on this
we do not recommend the use of MetaMath as the backend model
unless GPT4-like models need to be avoided for some external
reason.
One thing worth mentioning here is that once problematic ques-
tions have been identified for either version of MWPTutorcached,
one can have human annotators redo only those questions, thereby
increasing the success rate, something that is not possible for GPT4.
MWPTutorlive
GPT4 is somewhere in the middle, as we can only “fix”
the solution step space.
5.3 Utterance Evaluation
A major shortcoming of AI-on-AI-tutoring is that the AI student
may not be affected by the sometimes subpar tutor responses. To
better understand the quality of utterances both in terms of them
executing the pedagogical strategy and in term of their context
awareness, we hired human evaluators who worked in the ed-
ucation sector and asked them to evaluate utterances made by
MWPTutorcached
GPT4 and MWPTutorlive
GPT4 for MathDial. Because the
pumps are generic and very similar to each other and assertions
essentially boil down to reading out the answers, we focus only on
the hints and prompts in our evaluation.
Across the 45 conversations, MWPTutorcached
GPT4 and the student
model went over 135 solution steps Of these 102 went to the hint
state, while29 reached the prompt state. In the case of MWPTutorlive
GPT4,
we had 129 steps total, of which 88 went to a prompt hint state,
42 went to the prompt stage. 16 of these would then use a second
prompt and 12 would use a third, giving us a total of 70 prompts.
We presented each of these 289 utterances to human evaluators,
with the past conversation, the original math word problem, and
the current solution step as context. We boil down the requirements
set on hints and prompts set in Section 4.3 to the following binary
criteria which we asked the evaluators to evaluate the utterances
on:
• Grammatical: Is linguistically and grammatically correct.
• Not Reveal: Does not reveal the final answer for the step.
• Relevant (hints only): Addresses the step and the only way to
correctly answer the question is to complete the current step.
• Not Redundant (hints only): Is not redundant to what the stu-
dent already said in the previous step ie it makes sense to ask
this question after the previous response.
• Specific (prompts only): Is specific to the step, and not just a
vague lead-on statement.
• Helpful (prompts only): Can help the student make progress in
the current step, given the previous student’s utterance.
The annotators were paid the Prolific suggested wage of 10
GBP/hour. We show the annotation user interface in Figure 6 and
some example annotations in Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5. Figures 4 and 5
summarise the responses from the evaluators. Almost all utter-
ances are considered Grammatical by the evaluators, which is in
line with the known grammatical prowess of GPT4. It is unclear
why there is a slightly higher count of non-grammatical utter-
ances in MWPTutorlive
GPT4, but it could be potentially due to annota-
tors finding the more eloquent responses of GPT4 harder to judge
grammatically. Most of the utterances are also marked to be non-
revealing, which is expected given that any proposed utterances
that directly revealed the answer were assigned to be regenerated.
MWPTutorlive
GPT4 performs slightly better here. The evaluators fur-
ther seem to agree that most hints were relevant to the step and
that most prompts are specific, implying that they do what is ap-
propriate given the current solution step. Again, MWPTutorlive
GPT4
has an edge in this aspect. Of the two of its prompts found to be
non-specific, one is a second prompt and one is a first prompt, so
all third prompts are considered specific
The biggest potential weakness of MWPTutor cached comes in
the form of its utterances making sense in the context of previous
student utterances due to issues discussed in Section 4.4, which is
where the final two metrics come in. In this regard, all prompts
from MWPTutorcached
GPT4 are considered to be helpful by a majority
of evaluators which is a great sign. Surprisingly, MWPTutorlive
GPT4
ends up giving 5 prompts that are not considered helpful. One
reason why this happens could be the fact that there are more
prompts allowed for each step, making individual prompts less
helpful. Regardless, it is still a small number.
Hints, however, are found to be redundant in almost a third
of cases for MWPTutorcached
GPT4 , showing that handling of student’s
responses to pumps could be better. MWPTutor live
GPT4 brings this
number much lower, but still with 12 redundant Hints, it is the
second largest red bar in the graph, only behind its cached coun-
terpart. It is clear that MWPTutorcached
GPT4 ’s heuristic of matching the
left-hand side is too demanding, and highly likely to ignore the
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
0 20 40 60 80 100
Percentage of Hints
(Not Grammatical)
(Reveal)
(Not Relevant)
(Redundant)
MWPTutor(live):
MWPTutor(cached):
3 No
3 No
2 No, 1 Yes
2 No, 1 Yes
1 No, 2 Yes
1 No, 2 Yes
3 Yes
3 Yes
Grammatical
Not Reveal
Relevant
Not Redundant
Figure 4: Summary of Human evaluation for Hints from
MWPTutor. The total number of Hint samples is 102. Each
sample was evaluated by 3 annotators in 4 categories.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Percentage of Prompts
(Not Grammatical)
(Reveal)
(Not Helpful)
(Not Specific)
MWPTutor(live):
MWPTutor(cached):
3 No
3 No
2 No, 1 Yes
2 No, 1 Yes
1 No, 2 Yes
1 No, 2 Yes
3 Yes
3 Yes
Grammatical
Not Reveal
Helpful
Specific
Figure 5: Summary of Human evaluation for Prompts from
MWPTutor. The total number of Prompts samples is 29 for
MWPTutorcached
GPT4 and 70 for MWPTutor live
GPT4. Each sample
was evaluated by 3 annotators in 4 categories
student even if they propose a valid next step to the problem, which
can break student immersion.
It should be noted, however that 33 of the 135 steps did not
proceed to the hint state for MWPTutorcached
GPT4 , implying more than
half of the correct proposals by the student are being identified
as such. Curiously, the number of non-redundant hints is almost
the same for the two models. Further, in a vast majority of cases
where a correct proposal is misidentified, there is disagreement
between human evaluators indicating there might be some merit
in the rejection, though this is also the case for a many of correct
rejections.
Overall these evaluations show that utterances generated for
MWPTutorcached
GPT4 by the GPT4 backend are consistent with the strat-
egy definitions, and the transition function uses them reasonably
well. MWPTutorlive
GPT4 further increases the efficacy of the transition
function. Both models, however, have scope for improvement.
6 QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF
WEAKNESSES
While all our models do quite well on quantitative metrics as seen
above, these metrics do not fully grasp what it takes to make a
good tutor. To better understand the preparedness of our models,
we went over all 45 conversations that happened on the MathDial
dataset, for GPT4 and both MWPTutorGPT4 models, and summarize
our findings here.
Firstly, MWPTutorcached
GPT4 tends to sound monotonous and
dry. Part of this is because of the pre-set format for utterances like
all hints are hardcoded to begin with “Tell me this instead:, ” but this
can easily be resolved by having it sample from several rephrasings
of the same utterance. More difficult to fix are the repetitive strategy
and the lack of finer feedback or any affective statements, both of
which are there by design. Introducing finer feedback requires a
more fine-grained analysis of student utterances, which we found
off-the-shelf NLP methods to be incapable of doing while maintain-
ing a high degree of accuracy. Affective statements, like encourage-
ments, challenges, etc. would further require accurate judgment of
student confidence and correctness, which we chose to avoid due
to it being a possible failure node. GPT4 and MWPTutor live
GPT4
sound a lot more natural, including finer feedback and probing,
and even affective statements, although they are exclusively posi-
tive. The ability of MWPTutorlive
GPT4 in achieving appropriate affect
statements might indicate that we might have been overzealous in
not having affective statements for MWPTutorcached, and a similar
effect might be achievable using a smaller language model.
Further, since it matches correct answers with limited attention
to context, MWPTutorcached
GPT4 can sometimes get false positives,
and inadvertently reveal the answer . Consider the following:
Tutor: Tell me this instead: What is the total amount of feed needed for all
the chickens for one day if each chicken requires 3 cups of feed?. . .
Student: Sure, 3 cups of feed x 20 chickens = 60 cups of feed per meal. 60
cups x 3 meals = 180 cups of feed for the day. . . .
Tutor: 60 is correct, well done. What is the next step?
Here, the student gives the wrong answer of180, but MWPTutor
mistakes the intermediate calculation of 60 as the correct answer,
and effectively reveals it to the student. GPT4 is able to under-
stand context usually, although it is far from perfect. GPT4 fails
much worse on this question too. MWPTutorlive
GPT4, on the other
hand, tends to have a false negatives , perhaps because needing
approval from both the LLM and the RHS checker is a bit too strict.
Further, unlike GPT4, it still cannot account for student solving
multiple steps in one utterances, so at times it might look like it
is holding the student back. In general, it handles the false nega-
tives well, by either asking the student to repeat or revise steps
or asking for clarifications, but ideally, we do not want to prolong
conversations anymore than needed.
While it does not have the one-step per utterance restriction,
GPT4 still tends to overcomplicate questions or make redun-
dant calculations. In one question, where the student failed to
convert seconds into minutes, GPT4 gets the student to convert the
seconds to hours first, and then back to minutes. This introduced
precision errors, which it had to fix by rounding the final answer.
In another question GPT4 has a student recalculate a value she had
already calculated in a previous step. In yet another question GPT4
makes the student calculate the weekly rate of weight loss, when a
simple multiplication of time period by 4 would have yielded the
answer. The conversation in Figure 1 is also an example of where
this happens in the simpler MultiArith dataset. Due to its more
contained and well-structured state space, MWPTutorcached
GPT4 is
less likely to run into this issue , and handles the first two cases
mentioned here pretty well, though it makes the same error in the
last case.
The biggest problem with GPT4, continues to be that GPT4 can
lead the student to a wrong answer, sometimes even leading
them away from the right answer . In all 8 cases where GPT4
fails to get the student to the correct answer, it outright accepts a
wrong answer as correct. In a further 2 conversation, including the
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
one regarding chicken feed described earlier, GPT4 misdirects the
student onto the wrong path but somehow manages to get them
to say the correct answer. Finally, in one question, GPT4 rejects a
correct equation, and then goes off in a tangential direction, until
the maximum limit of 60 utterances is reached (this being the only
instance where the utterance limit comes into play). It must be
reiterated here that the final correct answer is given to GPT4 as
part of its prompt.
All MWPTutor models by design will never okay a wrong
answer. Of MWPTutorcached
GPT4 ’s failures one was a result of inadver-
tently revealing the final answer, while the other seems to have been
marked as incorrect by the annotators because the tutor resorts to
revealing rather quickly. Beyond these, in one question it accepts
an answer of−40 instead of 40, but this can be chalked down to
the fact that the question was asking for the “difference” between
two quantities, and did not make it clear whether the sign was
required (the first quantity was smaller. Also GPT4 makes the same
error. Both are marked as correct by annotators). We would like to
clarify that, all MWPTutor models, especially MWPTutor live
can also hallucinate , even if it did not happen in any of these
conversations to the best of the authors’ judgement (We attempted
to have the evaluators annotate the existence of wrong methods,
but found too much disagreement in their responses to consider
them viable).
Overall, we conclude that despite good showing on metrics, both
methods are still lacking in quality, and decide to not test them on
real students until we can significantly improve them.
7 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have stated throughout the paper that although self-sufficient,
MWPTutor is still a prototype, and we explained in Section 6 that
we still have a long way to go before making MWPTutor viable to
be used on real students. In this section, we outline some directions
for future work that could bring us closer to these goals.
7.1 Improving the Solution Step Space
The current solution step space takes the shape of a tree where
solutions can only diverge from each step. But this is non-realistic as
we know that all paths must lead to the same final answer and hence
need to converge at some point. Further, the order of carrying out
certain steps could be a partial order rather than a total order. This
would currently be represented by listing out all possible orders
as separate paths, but this causes a blowup in the number of steps.
Adding a richer structure to the Solution graph could vastly reduce
the size of the solution space.
In addition, each step of the solution should be made to follow
a more standardized format. Having a more precise definition of
the step would allow us to use LSA-like techniques to improve our
correct answer detection. Pre-defining possible errors for each step
would allow us to prepare to handle said errors. We can also have
descriptions of each quantity in the LHS to give more pointed hints.
7.2 Improving the Strategy Space
The current strategy space for the cached models is very linear, and
cannot react well to exact student responses. Once we have a better
solution step space, we can look for different types of errors and
diverge into different Prompts depending on the exact error should
the student fail to get the answer correct after the Hint state. There
can even be more than one Prompt revealing different amounts of
information based on the complexity of the current step. Another
thing entirely missing is the “Problematization” strategies described
by Reiser [ 28] and also used by MathDial. While most of these
would mainly benefit the cached versions, these can also be made
into more specific prompts for the live version. Alongside this, the
matching requirements for solution alignment can be made stricter
to better know where to start applying our intervention. This could
also come with relaxing the format requirement of “one step per
line” on the student solution. Further, it would be interesting to add
in methods to detect when the student ends up completing multiple
steps at once. All these would shorten the average lengths of the
conversation to balance more steps in the strategy space.
Alternatively, matching can be done using smaller specialized
LLMs trained for this task, and this would also apply to correct
answer detection and path matching
8 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose using LLMs to take over the authoring
of the state space for an AutoTutor-like model to minimize human
time requirements and build a sample system to showcase our pro-
posal. We find that our model performs better than a Single Prompt
GPT4 model in terms of automatic metrics while maintaining full
interpretability and modularity in its state space which GPT4 lacks.
Our model also holds up to the desired qualities in its utterances in
human evaluation, showing there is high potential in this direction.
But at the same time, it still faces issues that become more apparent
when going through conversations manually, indicating that there
is a lot of work still to be done.
These issues can be fixed by better LLMs and more sophisticated
techniques outlined in future work. Several potential steps have
already been outlined, and we hope to soon have better versions of
MWPTutor and other similar systems that can realize one-on-one
tutoring at scale.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly funded by the ETH-EPFL Joint Doctoral Pro-
gram in the Learning Sciences, a grant from the Swiss National
Science Foundation (Project No. 197155) and a Responsible AI grant
by the Haslerstiftung. We extend our gratitude to Jakub Macina
from the ETH AI Center, Nico Daheim from UKP Lab, TU Darm-
stadt, and Grégoire Farquet from Department of Architecture, ETH
Zürich for their invaluable feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] John R. Anderson, C. Franklin Boyle, and Brian J. Reiser. 1985. Intelligent Tutoring
Systems. Science 228, 4698 (1985), 456–462. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.228.
4698.456 arXiv:https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.228.4698.456
[2] David Baidoo-Anu and Leticia Owusu Ansah. 2023. Education in the era of
generative artificial intelligence (AI): Understanding the potential benefits of
ChatGPT in promoting teaching and learning. Journal of AI 7, 1 (2023), 52–62.
https://dergipark.org.tr/en/pub/jai/issue/77844/1337500
[3] Benjamin S Bloom. 1984. The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group
instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational researcher 13, 6 (1984),
4–16. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.3102/0013189X013006004
[4] Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora,
Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut,
Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, S. Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon,
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen A. Creel, Jared Davis, Dora Dem-
szky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John
Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren E.
Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori
Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu,
Jing Huang, Thomas F. Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Sid-
dharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, O. Khattab, Pang Wei Koh,
Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Lad-
hak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen
Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir P. Mirchandani, Eric
Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan,
Benjamin Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, J. F.
Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech,
Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Robert Reich, Hongyu
Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf H. Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher R’e,
Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishna Para-
suram Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori, Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr,
Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu, Sang Michael
Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei A. Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang.
2021. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. ArXiv (2021).
https://crfm.stanford.edu/assets/report.pdf
[5] Colin Bryson and Len Hand. 2007. The role of engagement in inspir-
ing teaching and learning. Innovations in Education and Teaching Inter-
national 44, 4 (2007), 349–362. https://doi.org/10.1080/14703290701602748
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/14703290701602748
[6] Zhiqiang Cai, Xiangen Hu, and Arthur C. Graesser. 2019. Authoring Conversa-
tional Intelligent Tutoring Systems. In Adaptive Instructional Systems, Robert A.
Sottilare and Jessica Schwarz (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham,
593–603. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-22341-0_46
[7] Eason Chen, Ray Huang, Han-Shin Chen, Yuen-Hsien Tseng, and Liang-Yi Li.
2023. GPTutor: A ChatGPT-Powered Programming Tool for Code Explanation. In
Artificial Intelligence in Education. Posters and Late Breaking Results Workshops and
Tutorials, Industry and Innovation Tracks, Practitioners, Doctoral Consortium and
Blue Sky - 24th International Conference, AIED 2023, Tokyo, Japan, July 3-7, 2023,
Proceedings (Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 1831) ,
Ning Wang, Genaro Rebolledo-Mendez, Vania Dimitrova, Noboru Matsuda, and
Olga C. Santos (Eds.). Springer, 321–327. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
36336-8_50
[8] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus,
Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Web-
son, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai, Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Dasha Valter, Sharan
Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai,
Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts,
Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling Instruction-Finetuned
Language Models. arXiv:2210.11416 [cs.LG]
[9] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun,
Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano,
Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training Verifiers to Solve Math
Word Problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 (2021). https://arxiv.org/abs/
2110.14168
[10] Chenhang Cui, Yiyang Zhou, Xinyu Yang, Shirley Wu, Linjun Zhang, James Zou,
and Huaxiu Yao. 2023. Holistic Analysis of Hallucination in GPT-4V(ision): Bias
and Interference Challenges. arXiv:2311.03287 [cs.LG]
[11] Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli
Celikyilmaz, and Jason Weston. 2023. Chain-of-Verification Reduces Hallucina-
tion in Large Language Models. arXiv:2309.11495 [cs.CL]
[12] Arthur Graesser, Natalie Person, and Derek Harter. 2000. Teaching Tactics in
AutoTutor. (01 2000). http://users.sussex.ac.uk/~bend/its2000/graesser.pdf
[13] Arthur C. Graesser. 2016. Conversations with AutoTutor Help Students Learn.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 26, 1 (01 Mar 2016),
124–132. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-015-0086-4
[14] Arthur C. Graesser, Kurt VanLehn, Carolyn P. Rose, Pamela W. Jordan, and Derek
Harter. 2001. Intelligent Tutoring Systems with Conversational Dialogue. AI
Magazine 22, 4 (Dec. 2001), 39. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v22i4.1591
[15] Kenneth R. Koedinger, Vincent Aleven, Neil Heffernan, Bruce McLaren, and
Matthew Hockenberry. 2004. Opening the Door to Non-programmers: Authoring
Intelligent Tutor Behavior by Demonstration. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems ,
James C. Lester, Rosa Maria Vicari, and Fábio Paraguaçu (Eds.). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 162–174. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
1007/978-3-540-30139-4_16
[16] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and
Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh (Eds.), Vol. 35. Curran Associates,
Inc., 22199–22213. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
8bb0d291acd4acf06ef112099c16f326-Paper-Conference.pdf
[17] Yi Liu, Gelei Deng, Zhengzi Xu, Yuekang Li, Yaowen Zheng, Ying Zhang, Lida
Zhao, Tianwei Zhang, and Yang Liu. 2023. Jailbreaking ChatGPT via Prompt
Engineering: An Empirical Study. arXiv:2305.13860 [cs.SE]
[18] Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Tanmay Sinha, Manu
Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. MathDial: A Dialogue
Tutoring Dataset with Rich Pedagogical Properties Grounded in Math Reasoning
Problems. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. https://openreview.net/forum?id=fyza2OQ9NI
[19] Florence Martin and Doris Bolliger. 2018. Engagement Matters: Student Per-
ceptions on the Importance of Engagement Strategies in the Online Learning
Environment. 22 (03 2018), 205–222. https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v22i1.1092
[20] Benjamin Nye, Arthur Graesser, and Xiangen Hu. 2014. AutoTutor and Family:
A Review of 17 Years of Natural Language Tutoring. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education 24 (12 2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-
014-0029-5
[21] Maxwell Nye, Anders Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Witold Michalewski,
Jacob Austin, David Bieber, David Martin Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Paul
Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Augustus Odena. 2021. Show Your
Work: Scratchpads for Intermediate Computation with Language Models. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2112.00114
[22] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
[23] José Paladines and Jaime Ramirez. 2020. A Systematic Literature Review of
Intelligent Tutoring Systems With Dialogue in Natural Language. IEEE Access 8
(2020), 164246–164267. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3021383
[24] Jim Parsons and Leah Taylor. 2011. Improving Student Engagement. Current
Issues in Education 14, 1 (May 2011). https://cie.asu.edu/ojs/index.php/cieatasu/
article/view/745
[25] Tung Phung, JosÃ© Cambronero, Sumit Gulwani, Tobias Kohn, Rupak Majumdar,
Adish Singla, and Gustavo Soares. 2023. Generating High-Precision Feedback
for Programming Syntax Errors using Large Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 16th International Conference on Educational Data Mining , Mingyu Feng,
Tanja KÃ¤ser, and Partha Talukdar (Eds.). International Educational Data Mining
Society, Bengaluru, India, 370–377. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8115653
[26] Tung Phung, Victor-Alexandru Pădurean, José Cambronero, Sumit Gulwani, To-
bias Kohn, Rupak Majumdar, Adish Singla, and Gustavo Soares. 2023. Generative
AI for Programming Education: Benchmarking ChatGPT, GPT-4, and Human Tu-
tors. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on International Computing Educa-
tion Research - Volume 2 (Chicago, IL, USA) (ICER ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41–42. https://doi.org/10.1145/3568812.3603476
[27] Jaakko Rajala, Jenni Hukkanen, Maria Hartikainen, and Pia Niemelä. 2023. "Call
me Kiran" – ChatGPT as a Tutoring Chatbot in a Computer Science Course.
In Proceedings of the 26th International Academic Mindtrek Conference . 83–94.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3616961.3616974
[28] Brian Reiser. 2004. Scaffolding Complex Learning: The Mechanisms of Structuring
and Problematizing Student Work. Journal Of The Learning Sciences 13 (01 2004),
273–304. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327809jls1303_2
[29] Kathryn M. Rich, T. Andrew Binkowski, Carla Strickland, and Diana Franklin.
2018. Decomposition: A K-8 Computational Thinking Learning Trajectory. In
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on International Computing Education
Research (Espoo, Finland) (ICER ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 124–132. https://doi.org/10.1145/3230977.3230979
[30] Robin Schmucker, Meng Xia, Amos Azaria, and Tom Mitchell. 2023. Ruf-
fle&Riley: Towards the Automated Induction of Conversational Tutoring Systems.
arXiv:2310.01420 [cs.CL]
[31] D. Sleeman and J.S. Brown. 1982. Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Academic Press.
https://books.google.ch/books?id=pjqcAAAAMAAJ
[32] Ting Song and Kurt Becker. 2014. Expert vs. novice: Problem decomposition/re-
composition in engineering design. In 2014 International Conference on interactive
collaborative learning (ICL). IEEE, 181–190. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/7017768
[33] Shashank Sonkar, Naiming Liu, Debshila Basu Mallick, and Richard G. Baraniuk.
2023. CLASS: A Design Framework for building Intelligent Tutoring Systems
based on Learning Science principles. arXiv:2305.13272 [cs.CL]
[34] Ferhat Yarkin and Justin P. Coon. 2022. Simple Gray Coding and LLR Calculation
for MDS Modulation Systems. CoRR abs/2201.08237 (2022). arXiv:2201.08237
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08237
[35] Longhui Yu, Weisen Jiang, Han Shi, Jincheng Yu, Zhengying Liu, Yu Zhang,
James T. Kwok, Zhenguo Li, Adrian Weller, and Weiyang Liu. 2023. Meta-
Math: Bootstrap Your Own Mathematical Questions for Large Language Models.
arXiv:2309.12284 [cs.CL]
[36] Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu, and Noah A. Smith. 2023.
How Language Model Hallucinations Can Snowball. arXiv:2305.13534 [cs.CL]
[37] Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and
Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT.
arXiv:1904.09675 [cs.CL]
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
A INSTRUCTIONS FOR REPRODUCTION
In this section, we list all prompts used by us for various models
involving GPT4. Parts of the prompt are context specific. we mark
them using fourth braces eg <problem>. We begin with a description
of all context specific elements:
• <problem> is replaced by the MWP being solved, eg. “Will
made 104 dollars mowing lawns over the summer. If he spent
41 dollars buying new mower blades, how many 9 dollar
games could he buy with the money he had left?”
• <answer> is only the final numerical answer of the current
problem. eg “7”
• <step> is the current step of the Solution step space. eg
“Divide the money left by the cost of one game to find out
how many games he can buy. 63 / 9 = 7 games. ”
• <RHS> is the RHS of the equation of the current step
• <int_sol> is the list of all previous steps from the solution
step space that have been completed, 1 in each line.
• <context> is the last 4 utterances in the conversation, 2 each
from the tutor and the student.
A.1 GPT4 single prompt
We use the following system prompt
A tutor and a student work together to solve the following math word
problem.
Math problem: <problem>
The correct answer is as follows:<answer>
You need to role-play the tutor while the user roleplays the student, Kayla.
The tutor is a soft-spoken empathetic man who dislikes giving out direct
answers to students, and instead likes to answer questions with other ques-
tions that would help the student understand the concepts, so that she can
solve the problem themselves.
Kayla has come up with a solution, but it is incorrect. Please start the
conversation, one line at a time, aiming to figure out what is Kayla’s
solution and what is wrong with it. Then try to get her to fix it. Write
’goodbye’ if you are done with the conversation
Subsequent responses from the student are fed in as user mes-
sages, while teacher responses are fed in as assistant messages.
Conversation stops when the token "goodbye" is observed in the
assistant message.
A.2 MWPTutor cached
GPT4
The hint, prompt, and final answer for each step, are generated
through a sequence of instructions. We start off with the System
instruction:
Turn the following statement into a question, which starts with "What", or
"How much" or "How many" . Do not mention any mathematical operation
like ’multiply’, ’add’, ’subtract’, ’divide’ etc. in the question. Also make sure
that the answer <RHS> does not appear <step>"
We resample until the hint checks are satisfied. Thereafter, we
perform a correctness check with the instruction:
Now answer the above question
If this reproduces the RHS, we store the previous response as
the Hint and this response as the Assertion. Finally, we proceed to
generate the prompt:
Generate a hint to get this answer. The hint should not include the answer
itself.
Again we repeat until the prompt checks are satisfied.
A.3 MWPTutor live
GPT4
We generate both prompts and hints using system instructions only.
The instruction for prompts is
A tutor is helping a student solve the following math word problem:
<problem>
The student has managed to come up with the following steps so far:
<int_sol>
According to the answer key, the next step is:
<step>
Note that the student does not have access to the answer key. The past 4
turns of conversation have proceeded as follows:
<context>
Provide the next utterance for the tutor. The next utterance should be a hint
to get the student to complete the next step and get the answer of "+RHS+".
If the student is trying to take the problem in a different direction, let them
know that it is not what we want. If the student is jumping to the next step,
ask them to first state the current answer of <RHS>.Make sure you do not
reveal the answer to the step in your hint.
Hereafter, for the hint, we say:
A tutor is helping a student solve the following math word problem:
<problem>
The student has managed to come up with the following steps so far:
<int_sol>
The past 4 turns of conversation have proceeded as follows:
<context>
The student seems to be progressing in the wrong direction with their last
utterance, the tutor needs to get him back on track.
Generate the next tutor utterance,by converting the following next step into
a question
<step>
Do not reveal the answer(<RHS>) or any mathematical operation used in
the step"
In both cases, we resample until checks are fulfilled
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
Figure 6: Screenshot of the intrinsic annotation user interfaces. Each crowd worker evaluated 10-20 dialogues. Apart from the
short instructions, we showed longer instructions at the beginning.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
Hint Recent history Question Solution Step Rating
Tell me this instead: What is the base
number of books before Wendy adds
the 20 extra books if she doubles the
number of slots she has, which is 36?
Tutor:You are correct upto
where you say “Calculate the to-
tal number of slots in the shelv-
ing system by multiplying the
number of rows by the number
of columns. 6 rows * 6 columns
= >36 slots. ” What do you think
should be the next step?
Student:The next step would
be to represent the number of
books Wendy needs to carry as
“x”. Then, we can set up an equa-
tion to represent the given infor-
mation. 2x + 20 = 36.
Wendy wants to place 20 more
than double the number of
books in a shelving system with
6 rows and 6 columns. How
many books will she need to
carry to complete her task?
Double the number of
slots to find the base
number of books be-
fore adding the 20 ex-
tra books Wendy wants
to place. 36 slots * 2 =
<<36*2=72>>72 books.
Grammatical:
YNN
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
YYN
Not revealing:
YYY
Tell me this instead: What is the profit
when the total cost is subtracted from
the new value of the house if the new
value is $200,000 and the total cost is
$130,000?
Tutor:200000 is correct, well
done. What is the next step?
Student:The next step would
be to subtract the total cost from
the updated value to find the
profit made by Josh.
Josh decides to try flipping a
house. He buys a house for
$80,000 and then puts in $50,000
in repairs. This increased the
value of the house by 150%.
How much profit did he make?
Find out the profit by
subtracting the total
cost from the new value
of the house. $200,000-
$130,000 = <<200000-
130000=70000>>$70,000.
Grammatical:
YYY
Relevant:
NNN
Not redundant:
NYY
Not revealing:
YNY
Tell me this instead: What is the total
amount of money earned in the second
year from the sales of books if each was
sold at the same price?
Tutor:65 is correct, well done.
What is the next step?
Student:We need to multiply
the number of books sold in the
second year by the price of each
book, which is $20.
Elise has been selling her Dad’s
collection of 250 books for three
years. Each book sells at 20$,
and she sold twice as many
books in the first year as she has
sold in the current year. There
are currently 50 unsold books,
and her sales number this year
is 45. What’s the total amount
of money she earned in the sec-
ond year?
Compute the total
amount of money
earned in the second
year by multiplying the
number of books sold
by the price per book:
<<65 * 20 = 1300>>1300
dollars.
Grammatical:
YYY
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
NNN
Not revealing:
YYN
Tell me this instead: What is the total
cost per person for engaging in minigolf,
purchasing arcade tokens, and enjoying
two go-kart rides?
Tutor:What should be the first
step?
Student:The first step is to sub-
tract $5 for the arcade tokens
from the $90 budget.
Morgan’s dad said that she had
$90 budgeted for her birthday
party. She wants to make sure
she and her friends all get to
play one round of mini-golf,
have $5 in arcade tokens, and
get to ride the go-karts twice.
A round of mini-golf is $5. The
Go-karts cost $10 a ride. How
many friends can she invite?
Calculate the total cost
per person for mini-
golf, arcade tokens, and
two go-kart rides. 5 + 5
+ (10 x 2) = <<5 + 5 + (10
* 2)=30>>30 dollars per
person.
Grammatical:
YYY
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
YYY
Not revealing:
NYN
Table 2: Example of MWPTutor cached
GPT4 Hints labeled by Human Evaluators. Y’s indicate a positive, N’s indicate a negative vote.
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
Hint Recent history Question Solution Step Rating
Exactly, let’s keep the momentum going.
Now, think about how we could figure
out the total number of books Elise man-
aged to sell over all three years. What
should we do with the number of un-
sold books to find that out?
Tutor:90 is correct, well done.
What is the next step?
Student:The next step is to cal-
culate how many books were
sold in the second and third year
combined.
Elise has been selling her Dad’s
collection of 250 books for three
years. Each book sells at 20$,
and she sold twice as many
books in the first year as she has
sold in the current year. There
are currently 50 unsold books,
and her sales number this year
is 45. What’s the total amount
of money she earned in the sec-
ond year?
Determine the total
number of books sold
over three years by
subtracting unsold
books from the ini-
tial collection: <<
250− 50 = 200 >>200
books.
Grammatical:
NNY
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
YYY
Not revealing:
NYY
How about we start by figuring out how
many hotdogs were prepared for half
of the guests to have two? Remember,
the caterer was initially expecting 36
guests.
Tutor:What should be the first
step?
Student:The first step should
be to figure out how many hot-
dogs the caterer prepared in to-
tal.
A food caterer was told to
prepare gourmet hot dogs for
36 guests. While most people
would only eat one hotdog,
he prepared enough for half
of the guests to be able to
have two hotdogs. However, 40
guests showed up, and every-
one wanted a second hotdog.
How many guests did not get
a second hotdog?
Calculate the total
number of hotdogs the
caterer prepared for
half the guests to have
two. Total hotdogs
prepared = Number
of guests initially ex-
pected + Extra hotdogs
for half of the guests
= 36 + (36/2) = <<
36+( 36/2) = 54 >>54
hotdogs.
Grammatical:
YYY
Relevant:
YNN
Not redundant:
YYY
Not revealing:
YYY
Actually, before we look at how many
Post-it notes she used at work, can you
think of how we might find out how
many Post-it notes Candice had after
she stopped at the store but before she
started using them at work? Remember,
she started with a certain number and
then added more from the package she
bought.
Tutor:What should be the first
step?
Student:The first step should
be to figure out how many post-
it notes Candice used at work.
Candice put 80 post-it notes in
her purse before she headed out
to her job at the coffee shop. On
her way, she stopped off at the
store and purchased a package
of Post-it notes; At work, she
placed a single Post-it note on
each of 220 different cups of cof-
fee. If she had 23 post-it notes
remaining overall, how many
Post-it notes were in the pack-
age that she purchased?
Determine the total
number of Post-it notes
used at the coffee shop
by subtracting the
remaining Post-it notes
from the initial amount
Candice had. 80 initial
Post-it notes minus
23 remaining equals
<< 80− 23 = 57 >>57
Post-it notes used.
Grammatical:
NYY
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
NNN
Not revealing:
YYY
That’s a great thought process! Now,
can you figure out the number of books
Elise sold in the second year? Remem-
ber, you’ll need to use the total sales
over three years and subtract the sales
from the first and third years from this
total.
Tutor:200 is correct, well done.
What is the next step?
Student:The next step is to fig-
ure out how many books were
sold in the second year by sub-
tracting the number of books
sold in the first and third year
from the total number of books
sold over all three years.
Elise has been selling her Dad’s
collection of 250 books for three
years. Each book sells at 20$,
and she sold twice as many
books in the first year as she has
sold in the current year. There
are currently 50 unsold books,
and her sales number this year
is 45. What’s the total amount
of money she earned in the sec-
ond year?
Calculate how many
books were sold in the
second year by subtract-
ing the first and third
year sales from the total
sales:<< 200−90−45 =
65 >>65 books..
Grammatical:
YYY
Relevant:
YYY
Not redundant:
YYY
Not revealing:
NNN
Table 3: Example of MWPTutor live
GPT4 Hints labeled by Human Evaluators. Y’s indicate a positive, N’s indicate a negative vote.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
Hint Recent history Question Solution Step Rating
That is not quite right. Here is a Hint:
To calculate the total monthly expense
for Madeline’s dog, you need to sum
the individual costs for food, treats, and
medicine. Consider each expense as a
separate amount and add them together
to find the total. Remember, the food
expense is a two-digit number ending
in zero, and both the treat and medicine
expenses have the same amount, which
is also a two-digit number ending in
zero
Tutor: Tell me this instead:
What is the total monthly ex-
pense for Madeline’s dog when
combining the costs of food,
treats, and medicine?
Student: Oh, right. So it’s $25 +
$20 + $100 = $145 per month.
Every month, Madeline has to
buy food, treats, and medicine
for her dog. Food costs $25 per
week. Treats cost $20 per month.
Medicine costs $100 per month.
How much money does Made-
line spend on her dog per year
if there are 4 weeks in a month?
Add the monthly
costs of food, treats,
and medicine to find
the total monthly ex-
penses for Madeline’s
dog. $100 (food per
month)+ $20 (treats
per month) +$100
(medicine per month) =
⟨⟨100+20+100=220⟩⟩$220
per month
Grammatical:
YNY
Specific:
YNN
Helpful:
YNY
Not revealing:
YYY
That is not quite right. Here is a Hint: To
determine the number of games Bobby
has, first identify Brian’s games and
multiply that amount by three. Once
you have that number, decrease it by
five and you will find out Bobby’s total
games.
Tutor: Tell me this instead:
What is the number of games
Bobby has if you take away 5
from three times the number of
Brian’s games?
Student:If we take away 5
from three times the number of
Brian’s games, we get 3*20-5 =
55 video games for Bobby.
Brian’s friend Bobby has 5
fewer than 3 times as many
video games as Brian does. If
Brian has 20 video games but
lost 5 right before the compari-
son was made, how many does
Bobby have?
Subtract 5 from the
tripled number of
Brian’s games to find
out how many games
Bobby has.
45-5=<<45-5=40>>
40 video games.
Grammatical:
YYY
Specific:
YYY
Helpful:
YYY
Not revealing:
NNY
Table 4: Example of MWPTutorcached
GPT4 Prompts labeled by Human Evaluators. Y’s indicate a positive, N’s indicate a negative vote.
AutoTutor meets Large Language Models: A Language Model Tutor with Rich Pedagogy and Guardrails
Hint Recent history Question Solution Step Rating
It seems there’s a little confu-
sion. To clarify, since the two
pairs of heels together cost five
dollars less than the boots, to
find the cost of the boots, we
actually need to add $5 to the
total cost of the heels, not sub-
tract it. Given this, what oper-
ation should we perform with
the $99 to find the cost of the
boots?
Tutor:Actually, remember the problem
stated that the two pairs of high heels to-
gether cost five dollars less than the boots.
With that in mind, what do you think we
should do with the $99, which is the total
cost of the two pairs of heels, to find out
how much more expensive the boots are
compared to this total?
Student: Oh, I see. We should subtract $5
from $99 to find the cost of just the boots.
So the final answer is $94.
Gloria is shoe shopping
when she comes across a
pair of boots that fit her
shoe budget. However, she
has to choose between the
boots and two pairs of high
heels that together cost five
dollars less than the boots.
If one pair of heels costs $33
and the other costs twice
as much, how many dollars
are the boots?
Determine the cost of
the boots by adding five
dollars to the total cost
of the two pairs of heels.
99 + 5 = << 99+ 5 =
104 >>104 dollars
Grammatical:
NNY
Specific:
YYY
Helpful:
YYY
Not revealing:
YNY
Actually, there seems to be a
misunderstanding about how
to double the slots. To double
the number of slots doesn’t in-
volve dividing them by 2. In-
stead, think about what "dou-
ble" means in terms of multi-
plication. Can you try recalcu-
lating how many books would
fit if we double the space avail-
able, before adding the extra 20
books Wendy wants?
Tutor:That’s a good attempt, but let’s con-
sider Wendy’s plan a little more closely. She
wants to place 20 more than double the num-
ber of books based on the slots available.
Given that we’ve calculated the total slots,
how do you think we should figure out what
double the number of slots would represent
in terms of books?
Student:Oh, I see. We would need to divide
the total slots by 2 to get the number of
books that would fit in double the slots. So,
it would be 36/2 = 18 books. Then, we add
20 to get the final number of books needed,
which would be 18 + 20 = 38 books.
Wendy wants to place 20
more than double the num-
ber of books in a shelving
system with 6 rows and 6
columns. How many books
will she need to carry to
complete her task?
Double the number of
slots to find the base
number of books be-
fore adding the 20 ex-
tra books Wendy wants
to place. 36 slots * 2 =
<< 36∗ 2 = 72 >>72
books.
Grammatical:
YYY
Specific:
NYN
Helpful:
NYY
Not revealing:
YNY
Actually, it seems there’s a mis-
understanding in how we’re
adding up the bids. You’ve done
well to identify the amounts for
each of Carmen’s subsequent
bids, but we also need to con-
sider the total cost by adding
all of her bids together, not
just the final bid amount. Re-
member, the question asks for
the total amount Carmen pays,
which includes her initial bid of
$200 plus the additional bids she
places. Can you calculate the
sum of all her bids to find the
total cost?
Tutor:Actually, it seems there’s a misunder-
standing in how we’re adding up the bids.
You’ve done well to identify the amounts
for each of Carmen’s subsequent bids, but
we also need to consider the total cost by
adding all of her bids together, not just
the final bid amount. Remember, the ques-
tion asks for the total amount Carmen pays,
which includes her initial bid of $200 plus
the additional bids she places. Can you cal-
culate the sum of all her bids to find the
total cost?
Student: Yes, so the second bid is $250, the
third bid is $300, and the fourth bid is $350.
So the total cost for Carmen to win the desk
is $350.
Carmen goes to an auction
to win an antique desk. She
accepts the opening bid of
$200 and continues bidding
until she wins. The bids on
the desk rise by $50 each
time and 3 other people
each bid once. Carmen bids
after each of the 3 other
people and eventually wins.
How much money, in dol-
lars, does the desk cost her?
Carmen accepts the
opening bid, which is
<< 200= 200 >>200
Grammatical:
YYY
Specific:
YYY
Helpful:
YNN
Not revealing:
YYY
It looks like there might have
been a small mistake in your
calculation. Remember to first
convert the annual interest rate
to a monthly rate by dividing it
by 12, and then multiply by the
number of months, which is 5
in this case, and finally apply it
to the borrowed amount to find
the total interest. Could you try
recalculating the total interest
for the five-month period using
these steps?
Tutor:Yes, you’re on the right track! Now,
with that approach, calculate the total in-
terest for the five-month period using the
annual interest rate of 10%. Remember, after
finding the monthly rate, multiply it by the
number of months to get the total interest.
What do you get?
Student:I got $152.08 for the total interest.
Karan borrowed $3,650 for
five months at an inter-
est rate of 10%. She has to
pay an equal amount every
month. How much does she
have to pay per month?
Calculate the total inter-
est for the 5-month pe-
riod: 3650 * 10% =<<
3650∗0.10 = 365 >>365
dollars.
45-5=<<45-5=40>>
40 video games.
Grammatical:
YYY
Specific:
YYY
Helpful:
YYY
Not revealing:
NNY
Table 5: Example of MWPTutor live
GPT4 Prompts labeled by Human Evaluators. Y’s indicate a positive, N’s indicate a negative vote.
Sankalan Pal Chowdhury, Vilém Zouhar, Mrinmaya Sachan
Listing 1 An example solution and utterance space from the MultiArith dataset obtained using GPT4
"question": " Will made 104 dollars mowing lawns over the summer. If he spent 41 dollars buying new mower blades, how many
9-dollar games could he buy with the money he had left? ",↩→
"answer": 7,
"solution": {
"step": [
"Calculate the money left after Will spent on the mower blades by subtracting the cost of the blades from the initial amount
he made. 104 - 41 = <<104 - 41=63>>63 dollars left."↩→
],
"follow-ups": [
{
"step": [
"Divide the money left by the cost of one game to find out how many games he can buy. 63 / 9 = <<63 / 9=7>>7 games. QED"
],
"follow-ups": [],
"hint": "How many games can he buy with the money he has left if one game costs nine dollars?",
"prompt": "To find out how many games he can purchase, determine the number of times the cost of one game goes into the
total amount of money he has left.",↩→
"assertion": "He can buy 7 games with the money left if one game costs nine dollars."
},
{
"step": [
"Determine how many 9-dollar games Will can buy by dividing the money he has left by the cost of one game: 63 ÷ 9 = <<63
÷ 9=7>>7 games. QED"↩→
],
"follow-ups": [],
"hint": "How many 9 dollar games can Will buy with the money he has left?",
"prompt": "Consider how many times the cost of one game goes into the total amount of money Will has to spend.",
"assertion": "Will can buy 7 nine-dollar games with the money he has left."
}
],
"hint": "How much money is left after Will spends on mower blades if he starts with 104 dollars?",
"prompt": "Consider the initial amount Will had and subtract the cost of the mower blades he purchased to find out the
remaining amount.",↩→
"assertion": "Will has 63 dollars left after spending on the mower blades."
}